▗ ▗   ▖ ▖  Claude Code v2.1.250
           Opus 5 · API Usage Billing
  ▘▘ ▝▝    ~/code/semantics-quick/sam-xif/ruby/lean


❯ /model                                                                        
  ⎿  Set model to Opus 5 (1M context) and saved as your default for new sessions

❯ /model                                                                        
  ⎿  Set model to Opus 5 (1M context) and saved as your default for new sessions
     with low effort

❯ Let's build a second tab in the playground tool that is a "homebrew slice     
  explorer." I want to be able to select different files that we are trying to  
  type check in the homebrew slice, view the source in an editor that I can     
  make changes to, run the desugarer, run the source in the Lean model, and in  
  CRuby, and run the type derivation script, and finally attempt to validate    
  the derivation with a view into the output. I also want to be able to run the 
  homebrew linker and do all these things for the full linked source code of    
  the slice. I want to maintain the same semantic step-based view we currently  
  have in the playground, but have it toggleable so that we can save screen     
  real estate if we don't need to be showing the steps.                         

  Listed 3 directories, ran 4 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

⏺ Now the UI.

  Ran 5 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

⏺ Now wire the routes.

  Ran 11 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

⏺ Now the slice pane markup.

  Searched for 1 pattern, ran 10 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

⏺ Now the README section.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)
⏺ Built and verified end-to-end. Two files changed: playground/server.py,
  playground/index.html (+ README section).

  Tab bar in the header (Stepper | Homebrew slice explorer) plus a semantic 
  steps checkbox that hides the right-hand step pane and collapses the layout to
  one column. Hiding is layout-only — the trace is kept, and the slice tab's
  Step it ▶ turns it back on.

  Slice tab, one editable buffer feeding every stage:

  - Load file — a picker over homebrew/PLAN.md §2's eight files from the
    vendored homebrew/vendor/brew checkout (GET /slice/files, POST 
    /slice/source).
  - Link whole slice — homebrew/slice-driver/build.py (boot stubs + linker over
    the three entries + driver.rb), 2,159 lines. Two details copied from run.sh
    rather than rediscovered: it runs under uv from ruby/difftest, and the brew
    root is passed realpath'd (a .. is a KeyError inside the linker).
  - Strip ▸ — certify-file.sh's six-filter chain, run one filter at a time so a
    failure names the transform.
  - Desugar / Lean model ▶ / CRuby ▶ — export-json, rubycore (the Obs.lean
    observation record, not the stepper rendering), and the oracle, with status
    pills and an agree pill diffing stdout the way run.sh does.
  - Derive (jcert) and Validate ✓ as two buttons, not certify-file.sh's one
    pipe: the certificate sits in an editable box between them, so a reject is a
    fact about JSON you can read. The pane prints accept/reject, the why, and
    whether the accept was unconditional; a derive failure lifts
    JCert::Blocked's named head out of the backtrace.

  Verified live: vulns/semver.rb and vulns/cvss.rb strip → desugar → model →
  derive → accept, unconditional (validateJ_certifies_defs); the linked whole
  slice links, desugars (160 KB of RubyCore), runs in the model in ~3s and
  matches CRuby stdout exactly. Deriving over the linked program blocks at
  implicit send outside a method body — surfaced as a named coverage fact.

  One server-wide change worth flagging: the desugar timeout went 15s → 120s and
  executing calls got a separate 900s budget, since the toy budget can't hold a
  2,151-line program.

✻ Worked for 6m 46s · done 1:33 PM

❯ restart the server                                                            

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

⏺ Server restarted on http://localhost:8077 (responding 200). Log at
  /tmp/playground.log.

✻ Brewed for 11s · done 1:35 PM

※ recap: Goal was adding a Homebrew slice explorer tab to the playground; it's built, verified end-to-end, and the server is restarted on localhost:8077. Next: open the page and try the slice tab yourself. (disable recaps in /config)

❯ Great. It looks like the type derivation is rejecting on a send outside a     
  method body. Is this a limitation of our judgements, and if so why?           

  Ran 7 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

⏺ Yes — it's the judgment layer, not just the emitter. jcert.rb:293 is mirroring
  a rule that doesn't exist.

  Where the wall is. Every implicit-receiver rule carries the same premise:

  - JudgeRecv.self (Judge.lean:405) — ctx.selfCls = some cc → … (.cls cc)
  - Judge.self' (:541), vcall (:725), varIvar (:548) — likewise

  and selfCls is set by exactly one function, methodCtx (:102, selfCls := some 
  ctx.cls). Toplevel, class bodies and module bodies all have selfCls = none, so
  there is simply no rule to apply. Same for 1 + 1? No — that has an explicit
  receiver and goes through JudgeRecv.expl. It is specifically the implicit
  self.

  Why it's none there. selfCls = some C is defined to mean "self in this
  activation is an instance of C" (Types/Ty.lean:514). The two non-method
  positions have opposite truths:

  - class/module body — self is the class object. Its type is .clsOf C, not .cls
    C, and no self rule produces a .clsOf. Judge.lean:537 names this as a
    candidate widening and refuses it.
  - toplevel — self is main, which genuinely is an Object instance, so .cls 
    "Object" would be correct here and only here.

  One rule can't serve both, and the two positions aren't distinguished in a way
  the rules consume: the comment at :539 says exactly this — "top's threading 
  does not pin the two cases apart yet". J34 added inClassBody precisely because
  "self is the class object named cls" is a fact selfCls structurally cannot
  carry (Ty.lean:610), but its only consumer today is the semantic-axiom layer
  (SemClaim.reqCls), not a self rule.

  So this is a missing derivation, not a refutation — the block says the emitter
  had no rule, never that the program is ill-typed.

  Cost to lift, and it's very uneven:

  - Toplevel is cheap: set selfCls = some "Object" when top = true, plus the
    Object#puts-style rows. The premise would be discharged by the
    machine-typing invariant on the bottom frame, which already knows its self
    is main.
  - Class bodies are not: you'd need self : .clsOf C, rows keyed on .clsOf C,
    and — the real cost — the implicit sends that actually occur there are
    include / extend / attr_reader / private, which mutate the method table. D
    would have to model their effect, which is the reflective-metaprogramming
    problem, not a missing rule.

  Why the explorer shows it the way it does. The linked whole-slice program
  blocks on essentially its first line (require "sorbet-runtime" is an implicit
  send at toplevel; the boot stub class Module; include T::Sig is one in a class
  body). The individual files certify because the strip chain removes exactly 
  those: require_strip takes the toplevel implicit sends, visibility_strip the
  class-body ones. That's a large part of what the strip chain is for — and it
  also means the whole-slice Derive button won't go green from a stripping fix
  alone.

✻ Churned for 1m 22s · done 1:48 PM

❯ In cvss.rb, the whole file type checks based on the derivation, but when I    
  take round_up out to the top level, that function alone doesn't generate a    
  cert; the cert generator says "need row any#*". Why were we able to derive a  
  fact that * is available for the given value in the module certification?     

  Ran 5 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

⏺ We never derived that. The cvss.rb certificate says nothing at all about
  round_up's body — and the same is true of the other four methods in that file.

  What the module certificate actually contains. certify/jcert.rb:421, the defs
  arm: def self.x in module-body position is not machine-typed. It's emitted as
  a J31 semantic claim (Deriv.semantic), and the arm destructures the node as _,
  recv, name, _params, _body — the underscores are the whole story. The claim
  is only "this step defines a method named round_up at the realized eigenclass 
  and evaluates to :round_up": τ = sym, req_mod = true, fresh_names = 
  ["round_up"], discharged Lean-side by semAxiomsOk_defsSelf
  (Proof/Judgment/SchemaDefs.lean). The body is never visited.

  The certificate you validated bears this out — five sem-assumes, one per def 
  self.:

  ['base_score'] sym   ['severity'] sym   ['parse'] sym
  ['valid_values?'] sym   ['round_up'] sym

  That's also why it still reads unconditional: Main.lean:304 counts
  all-defsShapeB claims as discharged (validateJ_certifies_defs), so a file of
  def self.s can certify with every body unexamined.

  Why the toplevel version is harder, not easier. At toplevel def 
  round_up(value) is a plain def with a parameter, so it takes the defDecl arm
  (:387) — which does judge the body. And v1 opens parameters at any:

  tys = (params || []).map { Ty::ANY }

  So value * 100_000 is a send at receiver type .any, sig_of finds no row, and
  you get needed row any#*. Reproduced: your toplevel round_up blocks there; the
  same body inside module … def self.round_up certifies with zero rows about
  it.

  So the asymmetry runs the other way from how it reads. The whole-file accept
  is the weaker claim: it discharges each definition as a fact about the
  defining step and declines to look inside. Hoisting round_up to toplevel is
  the first time anything asks what its body means, and the answer is that the
  type language has no upper bound to put on a parameter — any has no rows,
  which is the same wall --assn's def g(n) 1 + n end hits from the other side
  (§6.5's deferred family, an upper bound on a variable).

  Two consequences worth keeping straight: round_up inside the module is not
  certified in any sense you could quote, and the fix for the toplevel case
  isn't a rule for * on any — it's parameter types (a declared row, i.e. reading
  the sig the strip chain just deleted, or C6's per-call-site instantiation).

✻ Crunched for 1m 9s · done 1:56 PM

❯ Okay, it is alarming that we can't check bodies of methods yet. What about    
  this approach: we generate a semantic schema lemma for each function/method   
  that's defined, and then type check that way.                                 

  Ran 7 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

⏺ Directionally right — and the scaffolding for it exists (SemJudge, J31, the
  H-layer). But before designing it, two corrections to the premise, and the
  second one relocates the problem entirely.

  We can check bodies. That isn't the gap.

  Judge.defDecl (Judge.lean:870) judges the body, and it is already fully
  general in the parameter types:

  lean
  | defDecl {… τs σ …} :
      τs.length = ps.length →
      Judge A D (bindParamsJ ps τs []) body false (methodCtx ctx name τs (some
  σ) bs) τb Γb' D →
      SubJ τb σ → …

  Arbitrary chosen τs, arbitrary declared return, SubJ τb σ. The any is purely
  the emitter's v1 choice (jcert.rb:388, "v1 takes params at any"). So the Lean
  side needs nothing new for typed parameters — that fix is emitter-only, and
  the sig that would supply the types is the one the strip chain deletes
  (certify/rbi.py already parses them, E6).

  The real wall is the declaration table, not the method rules

  baseDecls is four rows, all on Integer: +, -, *, zero? (Decls.lean:1005).
  Everything else is assumed rows from core-rows.txt — carried in the
  certificate, quantified over by validate_sound, making the accept conditional.
  And that file's header states the hard constraint:

  ▎ ONE ROW PER METHOD NAME, for the whole program. declaresName D name = false 
  ▎ per claim is name-global, so a second row at any class with the same name 
  ▎ rejects the whole certificate.

  So the table can hold String#to_s or Integer#to_s, never both. Now price your
  own example. With value : Float, round_up's four lines need: Float#*(Integer),
  Float#round, Integer#%, Integer#/(Integer) and Integer#/(Float). That is two
  rows at the same name / with different argument types — refused by
  name-globality — and Decls.lean:999 says the absences are deliberate: / and %
  raise ZeroDivisionError, and "the Float promotions would need the argument
  type unpinned". A Decls row is a single pinned signature; Integer#/ genuinely
  isn't one.

  round_up is hard for a structural reason, not an accidental one.

  Where your idea actually pays — and it's not on the user methods

  A schema is proved once over a syntactic pattern and discharged by reducing 
  the machine: the lambda schema is one proc allocation, semAxiomsOk_defsSelf is
  one defineMethod at a realized eigenclass. That's why SchemaDefs.lean can say
  it "carries no premise on the body" — the body is inert data. A method body
  is not one step, so a per-method schema must carry a body premise, and
  discharging that premise is the original problem wearing a hat. Worse, a
  parameterized body's obligation is universally quantified over inputs, so the
  J31 discharge-by-execution trick (eleven lines for lambda { 1 }) doesn't
  apply; you'd be on the Iris WP route (J36) per method.

  And literal per-method Lean codegen costs the posture: today the certificate
  is data and validation is one kernel Bool with no lake build in the loop and a
  frankly untrusted emitter. Generated lemmas keep soundness (the kernel still
  checks) but put minutes on the critical path — the slice ratchet stops being
  runnable.

  But invert the target and the idea gets strong. A semantic fact is about a
  specific expression at a specific receiver type — it does not go through
  Decls, so it is not name-global and it is not restricted to one pinned
  argument type. That is precisely the wall above. SemJudge (J30) is already
  Judge-free and reachability-defined, judge_semJudge already says the syntactic
  route is just one way of manufacturing SemJudge facts, and the H-layer's
  HTy.sem door already hosts exactly this. So the unit worth building is:

  ▎ a semantic fact per builtin call shape (Integer#/ at Integer and at Float, 
  ▎ as two facts), consumed by the send rule alongside a Decls row.

  That sidesteps name-globality and argument-unpinning in one move, it's a
  bounded number of facts (the core library, not the user's program), each is
  reusable across every file forever, and it reuses J31's existing plumbing
  rather than inventing per-program codegen.

  Suggested order

  1. Typed params in defDecl — emitter-only, no metatheory, and it makes "bodies
     are checked" true in practice rather than vacuous. Needs sigs preserved
     rather than stripped.
  2. Route defs to the machine-typed path instead of the claim exit, so def 
     self. bodies stop being install-and-forget. This is the .clsOf self-typing
     question from earlier and it's the smaller half.
  3. Semantic admission for builtin rows — the above. This is where your
     instinct is buying something the table structurally cannot.

  Steps 1–2 will make more files fail loudly than pass, because they stop
  skipping bodies. That's the point, and it's worth wanting: the current cvss.rb
  accept is unconditional precisely because it looks at nothing.

✻ Worked for 2m 14s · done 3:06 PM

※ recap: We built a Homebrew slice explorer tab in the playground, and found the type checker can't meaningfully check method bodies. Next: give jcert.rb typed parameters from Sorbet sigs instead of opening every parameter at `any`. (disable recaps in /config)

❯ Interesting. That makes sense. I guess then we'd just have to condition our   
  final acceptance on nothing shadowing the builtins, which I feel like is      
  probably okay as a starting point                                             
  Ran 4 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

⏺ Right, and it's not even a new axiom — that side condition is already the
  residue shape the certificate uses.

  EntryOkJ A D h τ name sig is precisely "at heap h, everything of type τ
  resolves name to a body conforming to sig" (Proof/Judgment/Cert.lean:47,
  discharged at Boot.initHeap for entryOk_int_nullary). And the "nothing
  clobbers it later" half is already proved: Decls.lean:1298 gives ResolvesAt
  survives defineMethod given the names differ — which is exactly the freshNames
  channel the defs claims already carry. So per-name non-redefinition has
  machinery, a preservation lemma, and a place in the printed assumptions a
  reader can reject. That's the project's normal posture, not a weakening of it.

  I measured whether it holds. The answer splits cleanly, and the split is
  unlucky.

  Free exactly where round_up needs it — definitions across
  lean/prelude/prelude.rb and the eight slice files:

  /      prelude:0   slice:0
  %      prelude:0   slice:0
  *      prelude:0   slice:0
  -      prelude:0   slice:0
  round  prelude:0   slice:0

  Nobody redefines arithmetic. For the operators you'd want semantic facts
  about, the assumption costs nothing.

  Not free where the slice actually lives:

  <=>    prelude:4   slice:12
  ==     prelude:3   slice:2

  Comparison is redefined sixteen times, and version comparison is what this
  slice does. So a semantic fact about <=> is the one thing you can't assume
  away — which is fine, because those are user methods that should be checked,
  not builtins to be assumed. It does mean the condition buys you round_up and
  buys you nothing on Version#<=>.

  One trap worth naming, because it will look like shadowing and isn't. The
  slice defines to_s, to_i, to_f, hash, inspect on Version, PkgVersion, Purl —
  different classes, so Ruby-wise nothing is shadowed. But declaresName is
  name-global, so those collide with core-rows.txt's
  String#to_s/String#hash/NilClass#inspect and reject the whole certificate.
  That's a self-inflicted constraint, not a soundness fact — and it's a second
  reason to prefer semantic facts keyed on receiver type, which dissolve it. A
  Decls row structurally cannot.

  So scope the condition per-name, not as "the builtins." A blanket "nothing
  shadows builtins" is already false for the composed slice — the boot stubs add
  Object#blank?, Pathname#stem, and class Module; include T::Sig. Those are
  additive monkey-patches and entirely benign; a blanket gate would reject them
  and nobody could pass it. "The names we claim are not redefined" is true,
  decidable at the boot heap, preserved by the existing step lemma, and
  printable as a list.

  One consequence to decide deliberately rather than discover: this makes
  accepts conditional. The six current whole-file accepts are unconditional
  partly because they inspect nothing inside bodies — validateJ_certifies_defs
  counts all-defsShapeB claims as discharged. Trading six vacuous unconditional
  accepts for conditional accepts that actually typed a body is the right trade,
  but it moves a consumed number, so it's worth saying out loud in
  judge-slice.md before it looks like a regression.

✻ Sautéed for 1m 34s · done 3:17 PM

❯ I wonder if the fact that we only have a nominal understanding of class       
  object behavior is stunting us here.                                          

  Ran 4 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

⏺ That's the right suspicion, but it's worth scoring it against the three
  blockers we actually established, because it only explains one of them — and
  then it explains a fourth one we hadn't named, catastrophically.

  Class-body self: yes, that's nominality. Ty.cls is keyed on a name —
  Ty.lean:37, "keyed on the name, not on an ObjId" — so a class object needs a
  separate .clsOf C arm and its own rules. Compare HTy.cls (c : ObjId), whose
  denotation is isA h v c, the machine's own is_a?. A class object is just a
  value with an id; there's nothing to add.

  Integer#/ at two argument types: no. That's the absence of
  overloading/intersection on MethodDecl, and HTy.union doesn't fix it — union
  is a predicate on values, not a method with two signatures. Orthogonal axis.

  Name-globality: not nominality either — but it multiplies with it, and that
  product is where we're actually stuck.

  The mixin arithmetic

  The slice has three include Comparable (version.rb:8, version.rb:21,
  pkg_version.rb:8). Each gets <, >, <=, >=, ==, between?, clamp derived from
  one <=>. Nominally that's ~21 rows, each a DeclsOk proof obligation. But
  declaresName is name-global, so < can be claimed at most once program-wide —
  for one of the three classes. Not "we haven't written the rows yet": the
  nominal table cannot hold the slice's central abstraction. Structurally it's
  one statement, duck ["<=>"], said once.

  You already built the answer — and it has no checker

  RubyCore/HJudge/HTy.lean:90:

  lean
  def duck (ms : List String) : HTy :=
    .sem fun h v => ∀ m ∈ ms, (lookup h v m).isSome

  Heap-indexed, so a define_method moves a value into the type rather than being
  assumed away — exactly the property the nominal table can't have. That's the
  fix to the mixin problem, and it's proved sound already.

  But HJudge is 225 lines with four constructors and no structural rules of its 
  own — ofJudge, sem, wp, sub (Judge.lean:140–157). It's an admission calculus,
  not a type system. So every fact either re-enters via ofJudge (dragging the
  whole nominal Judge and all its limits with it) or is a hand-written Lean
  proof. The H-layer proves nominality isn't foundational; it doesn't currently
  relieve the pipeline of it.

  And there's a hard reason it can't, as built: HTy.sem is Heap → Value → Prop.
  Not decidable, so it cannot ride a JSON certificate checked by one kernel
  Bool. Structural typing and the data-certificate posture are in real tension —
  the same wall the per-method-codegen idea hit, reached from the other side.

  Where that points

  Not "go structural everywhere" — that trades the ratchet for proof
  obligations. The move is a decidable structural fragment: duck's predicate is
  (lookup h v m).isSome, which is computable at a heap. A row-shaped arm on Ty —
  ⟨ <=> : (α) → Integer ⟩, discharged by lookup rather than by a name-keyed
  table lookup — stays inside decide, kills the mixin arithmetic, and drops the
  name-global guard for those rows because the claim is about a receiver, not a
  global name.

  The suggestive part: --assn already speaks this language. Its output is
  literally Box ⊒ ⟨ value : () → α1 ⟩ — structural rows, in the trusted
  checker's sibling. Types/Assn.lean has the vocabulary; Judge/Ty don't, so the
  certificate boundary is where it gets thrown away. That's a narrower and much
  more tractable question than "should we be nominal", and it's the one I'd want
  answered first: what stops Judge from carrying Assn's row constraints?

✻ Brewed for 1m 44s · done 3:33 PM

❯ What then, in your view, is the structural problem preventing us from getting 
  to where we want to be?                                                       

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

⏺ My view: it isn't nominality, and it isn't the missing rules. It's that the 
  system has no frame — no way to say a heap fact is locally stable — so
  stability gets bought globally or not at all.

  The thesis

  Every typing fact here is a claim about a mutable heap. EntryOkJ A D h τ name 
  sig says "at heap h, everything of type τ resolves name to a conforming body."
  Ruby's openness means any subsequent step can falsify it. So each fact needs
  an answer to "why is this still true later?", and the system has exactly one
  answer available: nobody redefines that name, anywhere, ever.

  That's declaresName, and it's name-global by construction (Decls.lean:329):
  D.rows.any fun cd => cd.2.any fun md => md.1 == name. Any class, any row. Its
  own docstring admits what it's standing in for:

  ▎ installing a name the declarations do not mention is an addition, and 
  ▎ additions are free; installing one they do mention is a redefinition, which 
  ▎ F1c is where the conformance check lands.

  That is frame reasoning, done globally because no local version exists. F1c —
  the actual check — is unbuilt, so the placeholder is a sledgehammer.

  Everything we hit is a symptom of that

  - The table is four rows. Each row's stability must be established against all
    future steps, so each is expensive, so there are almost none.
  - The mixin arithmetic is impossible. Three include Comparable, one claimable
    < program-wide. Not a missing row — a frame condition too coarse to
    distinguish three unrelated classes.
  - String#to_s blocks Version#to_s. Two classes sharing no resolution path
    below Object, refused by a name match.
  - Bodies go unchecked. A body is exactly where you need local reasoning —
    these parameters, this receiver — and a global frame has the least to say
    there. Hence params at any, hence defs taking the semantic-claim exit.
  - HTy can't ride a certificate. sem : Heap → Value → Prop is the honest form
    of a local behavioral fact, and it's undecidable, so it can't be a JSON row
    checked by decide. Nominality isn't what's blocking that; locality is.

  Note the shape: the certificate posture wants every fact decidable at a fixed 
  heap, and Ruby makes the interesting facts true only relative to a frame.
  Decidable-at-boot-heap plus a name-global guard is the one corner satisfying
  both, and there's nearly nothing in it. That's the structural problem.

  What I'd do about it

  Replace the global guard with a certificate footprint, and it does not require
  Iris.

  A row at .cls C is threatened only by an install of that name on a class on 
  C's resolution path — that's what Decls.lean:463 actually quantifies (∀ k, 
  TyClass h τr k → ResolvesAt h k mname bid). So:

  1. The certificate carries its footprint: the (class, name) pairs the
     derivation depends on. Data, printable, auditable — the same posture as
     carries: today.
  2. The checker walks the program for method-installing steps and verifies none
     lands on an ancestor of a footprint class. Syntactic, decidable, stays
     inside decide.
  3. The preservation lemma already exists — resolvesAt_defineMethod
     (Decls.lean:1298) with its name-inequality premise. It needs quantifying
     over a footprint set instead of a single name.

  def to_s at toplevel still gets refused (it installs on Object, genuinely on
  String's path — the global guard wasn't crazy, just undiscriminating). def 
  to_s inside class Version stops being refused, because Version isn't on
  String's path. That one change gives you multi-class core rows, the three
  Comparable classes, and therefore typed bodies — which is most of what the
  last hour has been about.

  Iris/wp is the general solution to the same problem and it's already in the
  dependency graph (J36). I'd hold it in reserve: the footprint buys the slice
  at a small fraction of the cost, and unlike wp it doesn't put proof terms in
  the certificate.

  What this does not fix

  Worth stating so it isn't oversold. Integer#/ at both Integer and Float
  arguments is a genuinely separate gap — MethodDecl is one pinned signature and
  there are no intersections; a frame doesn't help. And behavioral content
  ("responds to each with a block yielding τ") remains the recorded
  step-indexing flip condition (HTy.lean:87). Those are real, but they're
  features to add, not a corner the design is stuck in. The frame is the corner.

✻ Churned for 1m 15s · done 4:03 PM

※ recap: We built a Homebrew slice explorer tab in the playground (load/link, strip, desugar, run in Lean and CRuby, derive and validate certificates) and then diagnosed why method bodies go unchecked. Next: decide whether to implement the certificate-footprint replacement for the name-global guard. (disable recaps in /config)

❯ Ok, so at a high level, there are three big classes of problems: 1. method    
  overloading, 2. the prelude rewriting terms, 3. no notion of a frame. Does    
  this sound right?                                                             

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

⏺ Roughly right — I'd restate #2, broaden #1, and add a fourth thing that isn't
  a problem but decides which fixes are allowed.

  1. Signature expressiveness (your "overloading") — yes, broaden it

  MethodDecl is one pinned signature per (class, name). Integer#/ at Integer and
  at Float is two, and Decls.lean:999 names this as the reason the Float
  promotions are absent: they "would need the argument type unpinned."

  The same ceiling shows up from the other side in --assn: def g(n) 1 + n end is
  unknown because it needs α1 ≤ Integer, an upper bound on a variable, which
  Types/Assn.lean deliberately doesn't have. So the class is the signature 
  language can't say what the method does — no intersections, no bounds.
  Overloading is the loudest instance.

  2. The prelude — real, but it's not term rewriting

  The precise problem is that the core library is Ruby, and the row machinery's 
  main arm only recognises builtins. ResolvesAt (Proof/Static/Decls.lean:109)
  requires:

  lean
  md.builtin = some bid ∧ md.fromPrelude = false

  A prelude-Ruby method has builtin = none, so it can never satisfy it — "a
  prelude method has no bid to run" (:257). There is a second arm, ResolvesUser,
  built exactly for this, and its docstring calls it D8's dominant category:
  153 of 285 prelude methods. But it carries md.params = [] ∧ md.declared = [] —
  nullary only. So today: builtins are witnessable, nullary prelude methods are
  witnessable, and everything else in the core library can only be assumed
  (core-rows.txt).

  Your abs intuition is the related second-order effect: defined twice in the
  prelude, so the crubyShadow clause kills the row even at the boot heap.

  3. No frame — yes, my thesis

  Nothing to add beyond last turn: declaresName is name-global because there's
  no local stability notion, and its own docstring admits it stands in for an
  unbuilt check (F1c).

  4. The posture constraint — not a problem, but it's why the obvious fixes are 
  barred

  The certificate is data, validated by one kernel Bool, with an untrusted
  emitter and no lake build in the loop. That's what killed the two most natural
  ideas in this conversation: per-method generated lemmas (proof terms in the
  loop) and HTy (sem : Heap → Value → Prop, undecidable). Any fix has to stay
  inside decide or the posture changes — and that's a deliberate decision
  someone should make explicitly rather than discover.

  How they compose

  They're not peers; they stack.

  - #3 unlocks coverage. A footprint frame lets rows exist at many receivers at
    once — three Comparable classes, String#to_s alongside Version#to_s. That's
    what makes typed bodies possible at all.
  - #2 then decides whether those rows are proved or assumed. With #3 fixed, the
    mixin rows you want are Comparable's </>/between? — which are prelude Ruby 
    with parameters, so ResolvesAt can't witness them and ResolvesUser won't
    take them. You'd get conditional accepts. That's fine as a starting point
    (it's already the core-rows.txt posture), but #2 is what converts
    assumptions into discharged obligations.
  - #1 is orthogonal and caps specific methods regardless of the other two.
    round_up stays blocked on Integer#/ at two argument types even with a
    perfect frame and a fully witnessed prelude.

  So if I had to sequence: #3 first (largest unlock, stays decidable, reuses
  resolvesAt_defineMethod), #2 second (arity on ResolvesUser, converting the
  biggest assumed block into proofs), #1 last and separately, since it's a
  change to the type language rather than to the heap reasoning.

✻ Baked for 1m 1s · done 4:17 PM

❯ Okay. I agree with your take that local heap stability is arguably the most   
  important thing we can start to be able to reason about. Let's work together  
  on a solution. My first thought is that we should extend the semantic         
  judgement framework to be able to prove local heap stability for certain      
  slices of program. And perhaps we can even prove that anything that subset of 
  the syntactic judgements successfully type is adequate for claiming heap      
  stability. Do you think this helps at all?                                    

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

⏺ Yes, it helps — but the first half is closer to done than you'd expect, and
  that changes what to build.

  The stability property already exists and is already preserved

  InvJ (Proof/Judgment/Konts.lean:530) is, in part:

  lean
  ∃ (F : Decls) (c : JCtx) (Γ : Env) (Γs : …),
    DeclsOkJ A F m.heap ∧ FramesOkJ … ∧ StackCtx … ∧ GlobalsOk F … ∧ CtlOkJ F …

  F is existentially quantified and DeclsOkJ A F m.heap is a conjunct that
  step_okJ already proves every step preserves. That is local heap stability for
  the footprint F, machine-checked, today. And the transport lemma is already
  the right shape:

  lean
  resolvesAt_defineMethod : ResolvesAt h k mname bid → ¬(mname = name) →
                            ResolvesAt (defineMethod h cls name md) k mname bid

  So we don't need a new judgment for (a). We need to change how one 
  preservation case discharges its premise: hne : ¬(mname = name), currently
  supplied globally by declaresName D name = false, replaced by
  path-disjointness — cls is not on the resolution chain of any footprint entry.
  One lemma generalization, in the case that is already load-bearing. That's
  the whole of your first idea, and it's small.

  Your second idea is the part that's genuinely new

  And it matters for a reason worth stating: my footprint proposal, on its own,
  needs a syntactic walk over the entire program to find method installs —
  including code we never typed. "Typed ⇒ stable" turns that into a walk over
  only the untyped remainder, which is compositional and shrinks as the fragment
  grows. That's the right architecture.

  I'd sharpen the statement, though. Not "typed ⇒ stable" — that's either false
  or vacuous depending on how you read the escape hatches. Rather:

  ▎ Every admission route declares what it installs, and the theorem is 
  ▎ disjointness: if a derivation's declared install-set misses F's resolution 
  ▎ paths, running it preserves F.

  The precedent already exists — SemClaim.freshNames is exactly this channel,
  invented ad hoc for the defs schema and consumed by DeclsOkJ_defineMethod. The
  move is to promote it from a per-schema hack to the layer's stability
  channel: defPromote already declares its install (it returns addRow D cls 
  name), defDecl/defForget install into the heap and would declare there, and
  Judge.semantic gets a footprint field beside freshNames. Then "typed ⇒ stable"
  is a real induction over Judge with a genuine content.

  The hole in both of our proposals

  ResolvesAt's last clause:

  lean
  crubyShadow h ((ancestors h k).takeWhile (· != owner)) mname = none

  A row can be invalidated without anyone installing that name on a class we 
  track — by mutating the chain. prepend inserts into ancestry; include on a
  superclass does too. So the footprint cannot be a set of (class, name) pairs.
  It has to be names plus the chain segments they resolve through, and the
  adversary is untyped code doing include/prepend/extend.

  This is not hypothetical for our target. The slice has three include 
  Comparable, and the boot stubs do class Module; include T::Sig; end — and
  Module is on essentially everything's chain. That one could invalidate the
  entire footprint in a single step.

  What I'd do first

  Before designing the footprint representation, I'd spend an hour on a
  measurement, because it decides the shape:

  Which ancestry mutations does the slice actually perform, and do they touch 
  the chains we'd claim rows on? If the answer is "three include Comparable at
  fresh user classes plus one include on Module", then the design is:
  chain-shape stability is a boot-time fact plus a small allowlist, and the
  footprint stays name-keyed. If untyped code mutates chains under our feet at
  arbitrary points, the footprint has to carry chain segments and the whole
  thing gets heavier.

  Then the first proof I'd attempt is the smallest load-bearing one: generalize
  resolvesAt_defineMethod from ¬(mname = name) to path-disjointness, and push it
  through the defineMethod case of step_okJ. If that goes through, the rest is
  plumbing and your adequacy theorem is a clean induction. If it doesn't, we
  find out in one lemma instead of after building a judgment layer.

  Want me to run that measurement over the slice now, or go straight at the
  lemma?

✻ Sautéed for 1m 34s · done 4:23 PM

❯ Aren't we approaching separation logic now at this point? It sounds like      
  basically what you're saying is that we need to be able to claim that a given 
  derivation consumes only the resources it needs and everything else is left   
  unchanged.                                                                    

⏺ That's exactly it, and naming it that way is useful because it tells us which
  parts are textbook and which parts aren't.

  The frame rule is precisely the theorem I was groping toward: {P} e {Q} ⟹ {P *
  R} e {Q * R}. My "declared install-set disjoint from F" is its side
  condition, and your "typed ⇒ stable" is the claim that a Judge derivation has
  a bounded footprint — which is what makes the frame rule applicable at all.

  Two ways this is harder than the textbook case, and both are real:

  1. The resource is a negative fact. In vanilla SL, ownership is per-cell and
  disjointness is x ≠ y. But ResolvesAt's last clause is

  lean
  crubyShadow h ((ancestors h k).takeWhile (· != owner)) mname = none

  — no class on this chain segment defines mname. An absence, quantified over an
  unbounded set of locations. You can't own an absence cell-wise; you own it by
  owning the region totally. The name-global declaresName guard is the
  degenerate way to do that: own the name everywhere, forever.

  The encouraging part is that the region here is small and mostly static — a
  chain segment between a receiver's class and the owner. "Own the segment" is a
  realistic footprint, not a hopeless one. That's what makes a bespoke version
  plausible where general SL-over-Ruby would not be.

  2. The footprint's shape is itself mutable. prepend doesn't write a cell we
  own; it changes which cells the assertion quantifies over. That's the
  linked-list-spliced-from-outside case, and the standard answer is to own the
  spine as well as the slots. So the assertion needs two components:

  Row(C, m, σ)  owns   slots:  {(K, m) : K ∈ ancestors(C) up to owner}
                       spine:  the chain ancestors(C) up to owner

  Disjointness is then: a derivation's installs miss the slots, and its
  include/prepend/extend targets miss the spines. Both decidable from the class
  graph.

  And here's the observation that rescues the boot stubs. I flagged class 
  Module; include T::Sig as potentially fatal — it mutates the spine of
  everything. But it's a boot stub: it runs in the prefix, before any claim is
  made. SemJudge already quantifies over a conformant start state rather than
  the initial heap, so the footprint is taken after boot and that mutation is
  simply outside the frame. The existing definition accommodates this for free.

  The strategic point

  We're not choosing between separation logic and something else. Iris is
  already in the dependency graph (J36), and HJudge.wp is already one of the
  four admission routes — the frame rule is available today for anything we're
  willing to prove by hand. The design question is only where to put the 
  boundary:

  - Decidable footprint — our assertions are nearly all one shape (Row over a
    chain segment), disjointness for that shape is computable, it stays inside
    decide, and it preserves the data-certificate posture that is this project's
    actual differentiator.
  - HJudge.wp — the general frame rule, for the cases the decidable check can't
    see.

  That's the same escape-hatch architecture the layer already has, applied one
  level down. My view is: build the decidable footprint as a specialization of
  the frame rule — same statement, computable side condition — and leave wp as
  the door for what it can't express. If we design it as an ad-hoc guard we'll
  rediscover the frame rule badly; if we design it as the frame rule with a
  decidable disjointness check, wp composes with it later instead of replacing
  it.

  Concretely, the smallest thing that would tell us whether this works: define
  Row's footprint as (slots, spine), and generalize resolvesAt_defineMethod from
  ¬(mname = name) to slot-disjointness. That lemma is the frame rule for one
  step, and everything else is induction. Want me to draft that statement and
  see what the existing proof gives us for free?

✻ Cogitated for 51s · done 4:25 PM

❯ The ownership idea is powerful I think. Basically, nonlocal reasoning becomes 
  a lot easier if we create in essence a reader-writer lock over certain        
  resources. For instance, if I want to reopen a class, I need to claim write   
  ownership over its previously defined fields in order to overwrite them. If   
  there is a class that extends the reopened class, then the write side of the  
  lock can't be obtained because there                                          
  ⎿  Interrupted · What should Claude do instead?
❯ The ownership idea is powerful I think. Basically, nonlocal reasoning becomes 
  a lot easier if we create in essence a reader-writer lock over certain        
  resources. For instance, if I want to reopen a class, I need to claim write   
  ownership over its previously defined fields in order to overwrite them. If   
  there is a class that extends the reopened class, then the write side of the  
  lock can't be obtained because there's already a reader (the subclass).       
  However, perhaps it's okay for me to define net-new rows in the class by      
  claiming a separate write permission on those new slots.                      

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

⏺ That's the move that makes it work, and it fixes the problem I raised last
  turn — which I hadn't seen a clean answer to.

  Why: it makes the negative fact ownable

  I said the hard part is that ResolvesAt depends on an absence (crubyShadow … =
  none), and you can't own an absence cell-wise. Your slot framing dissolves
  that: make the slot's empty state a resource in its own right. Two per-(class,
  name) predicates instead of one:

  defined(K, m, body)     — the slot is filled
  empty(K, m)             — the slot is known empty      ← the ownable negative
  fact

  Then a row assertion is just a conjunction of slot permissions along the
  chain:

  Row(C, m, σ)  ≜  empty(K, m)  for each K in ancestors(C) before the owner
                ∗  defined(owner, m, b),  b conforming to σ
                ∗  spine(C .. owner)

  Now everything is a normal resource and disjointness is ordinary separation.
  The empty permission is what a subclass holds against its superclass's shadow
  path — your "there's already a reader."

  One correction: net-new is not always free

  Your last step needs a side condition. Take Row(Version, to_s, σ) resolving at
  Object#to_s. Defining a net-new to_s on Version is an addition at Version —
  and it breaks that row, because Version sits on its own shadow segment. So the
  rule isn't "additions are free"; it's:

  ▎ adding m at K requires the write side of empty(K, m) — which is held as a 
  ▎ reader by every Row(C, m, _) whose shadow segment contains K.

  Net-new is free exactly when nobody is reading that slot's emptiness. Which is
  the honest version of the distinction declaresName's own docstring draws
  ("additions are free; redefinition is where F1c lands") — you've given it a
  mechanism, and the mechanism is what makes it local instead of global.

  Worth noting ancestors (Heap.lean:527) puts prepends ahead of k, then k, then
  includes, then the superclass. So prepend on C writes directly into the head
  of the shadow segment of every Row(C, m, _) — your spine ownership catches
  exactly that, and it's why spine has to be a resource and not just a derived
  fact.

  It demonstrably clears both of our blockers

  Mixins. Row(Version, <, σ) and Row(PkgVersion, <, σ') both need
  defined(Comparable, <, …) — the same slot, read-shared, no conflict — plus
  empty on their own disjoint segments. Both claims coexist. That is precisely
  the case name-globality forbids today, and the three include Comparable stop
  being an arithmetic impossibility.

  String#to_s alongside Version#to_s. Version isn't on String's chain, so
  defined(Version, to_s) touches no slot Row(String, to_s, …) owns. No conflict.
  Also solved.

  Two for two on the things we actually measured.

  Why this stays inside decide

  The reason we can have reader-writer semantics without a runtime protocol: we 
  have a closed world. One linked program, one certificate, one enumerable claim
  set. Conflict detection is a static check over that set — for each install
  the program performs, does any claim hold a reader on the slot? — not a lock
  anyone acquires. Read permissions can be freely duplicable rather than
  fractional, because the writer's obligation is discharged by enumeration, not
  by counting.

  That's what keeps this a decidable specialization of the frame rule rather
  than a reimplementation of Iris. And where the closed world fails — Class.new,
  define_method in a loop, runtime prepend — the claim simply can't be made,
  and that case falls out to HJudge.wp, which is what it's for.

  The theorem to aim at

  ▎ If the claim set's slot permissions are conflict-free with respect to the 
  ▎ program's installs and spine mutations, then every step preserves DeclsOkJ A
  ▎ F m.heap.

  That's my resolvesAt_defineMethod generalization, but with the hypothesis
  structured the way you've described instead of as a bare disjointness side
  condition — which I think is strictly better, because the empty/defined split
  is what lets the induction go through the shadow clause rather than around it.

  Shall I write the Slot / Row definitions and the generalized lemma statement,
  and see how much of the existing resolvesAt_defineMethod proof survives?
  That's the cheapest way to find out whether the shadow clause cooperates.

✻ Crunched for 1m 12s · done 4:37 PM

❯ Ah, this is interesting. So we can model a ruby object as an abstraction of   
  infinitely many slots. Some of those slots are filled, some aren't. And to    
  check if a slot is filled, and what's inside, no matter what, you need the    
  reader lock on that slot. To update a slot, you need the writer lock. This    
  helps with reasoning about method_missing too. method_missing essentially     
  populates all of the unfilled slots. So if a method_missing is present, then  
  when a slot is found to be empty, the method missing value takes that slot.   
  So it's like a null coalescing operation. And resolving a slot also takes     
  into account ancestors. I am visualizing a projection of the entire           
  ancestors' slot stack into a single slot, with the slot value closest to the  
  front taking precedence. So to change any slot, you also need to own write    
  permission for all the other slots in front of it (all subclasses).           

  Ran 3 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

⏺ The co-finite version of "infinitely many slots" is what makes this
  implementable, and it lands method_missing in exactly the right place.

  Slots as a map with a default

  You can't enumerate infinite slots, so empty has to be held co-finitely:

  slots(K)  =  finite map (name ↦ defined(body))  ⊎  default

  Ordinary classes have default = ⊥ (lookup falls through to the next ancestor).
  And then your point 3 is literally: method_missing is a write to the default 
  component. Not a write to any named slot — a write to the one resource that
  every unnamed slot's emptiness is derived from. That's why it feels like
  "populates all the unfilled slots": it does, in one step, by changing the
  default.

  The permission consequence is sharp and, I think, exactly right:

  - defined(K, m, b) readers are unaffected by method_missing. Positive
    resolution finds m before the default is consulted.
  - empty(K, m) readers are all invalidated at once. Emptiness stops meaning
    "falls through."

  The warning that comes with it

  This is currently free, and the slot design is what makes it cost something.
  hookFreeNames = ["method_added", "define_method"] (Types/Decls.lean:694) —
  method_missing is not in it, and that's sound today precisely because a Row
  only ever asserts positive resolution (lookupIn h k m = some (owner, md)),
  which method_missing cannot disturb. Nothing in the system currently owns
  emptiness.

  Make empty a first-class resource — which we must, because that's the whole
  point of handling the shadow clause — and method_missing becomes load-bearing
  for the first time. That's a real new obligation, not a reason to back off,
  but it should be a deliberate cost rather than a surprise.

  One correction: it's still one slot, one lock

  ▎ to change any slot, you also need to own write permission for all the other 
  ▎ slots in front of it (all subclasses)

  Stronger than needed, and the difference matters. Writing (K, m) requires the
  write side of (K, m) alone. What produces the "all subclasses" feeling is that
  the readers of (K, m) are indexed by subclasses — every Row(C, m, _) whose
  chain passes through it, either as owner (defined) or as shadow segment
  (empty). You need those readers' absence, not ownership of their slots.

  Practically decisive: "own all front slots" is unbounded — it quantifies over
  subclasses that don't exist yet — whereas "no outstanding reader on this slot"
  is enumerable over the certificate's claim set. The second stays inside
  decide; the first can't.

  Both of your directions then collapse into one rule:

  ▎ To write (K, m): no claim may hold a reader on (K, m). Overwriting conflicts
  ▎ with defined readers; adding conflicts with empty readers; method_missing 
  ▎ conflicts with every empty reader on chains through K.

  The model has already done this argument by hand

  Worth seeing, because it's the strongest evidence the framing is right. From
  NoHook's docstring (Proof/Static/Decls.lean:2011):

  ▎ the prelude's T::Sig legitimately carries method_added (the sig-enforcement 
  ▎ hook), and it is reachable only from a class that extends it — which the 
  ▎ fragment never does and the per-value clause already polices.

  That is a locality argument — this hook exists, but no chain we care about 
  reaches it — written in prose as a special case, propping up a global
  invariant. It's the same shape as declaresName standing in for F1c. Two global
  sledgehammers, both already documented as approximations of a locality
  argument nobody had a mechanism for. The slot permissions are that mechanism,
  and they'd retire both.

  Next

  I'd write, in this order: Slot (defined/empty/default), Row(C, m, σ) as the
  chain-segment conjunction, and then the generalized resolvesAt_defineMethod
  with slot-disjointness in place of ¬(mname = name). The third one is the test
  — if the shadow clause cooperates with the empty decomposition, the design
  holds; if it fights, we'll know within a lemma rather than after a layer.

  Want me to draft those three?

✻ Sautéed for 1m 40s · done 4:45 PM

❯ Do you think we need to use Iris here? Or is it worth trying to model this as 
  a new semantic model of ruby types within our first-order world that we've    
  already started building?                                                     

⏺ First-order, and I'd say that fairly strongly — but build it as a resource
  algebra so the Iris door stays open and mechanical.

  Why first-order

  Decidability is the binding constraint, and it's the one we've hit three 
  times. Per-method codegen died on it, HTy.sem : Heap → Value → Prop died on
  it, and an Iris wp obligation dies on it too — all three produce proof terms
  where the certificate needs data checked by one kernel Bool. A first-order
  slot model where conflict-freedom is computed over an enumerable claim set is
  the only shape that fits the posture we've spent this whole conversation
  trying to protect.

  The assertion language is four predicates. defined(K,m,b), empty(K,m),
  default(K), spine(C..owner). Iris gives higher-order ghost state, invariants,
  step-indexing, the later modality — and we'd use essentially none of it.
  That's not free: it's a dependency in the critical path plus a mental tax on
  every future reader of the proof.

  The closed world is doing the work, not the logic. Reader-writer conflict
  detection reduces to enumeration precisely because there's one linked program
  and one claim set. Iris's machinery exists for settings where you can't
  enumerate — open, concurrent, ownership transferred at runtime. We've designed
  that away deliberately, and Ruby's table mutation is sequential besides.

  TCB. The J-layer metatheory is axiom-clean today; iris-lean sits in the
  H-layer only. Putting Iris under invariant_sound/judge_sound_cert changes the
  trust story for the main theorem in exchange for machinery we're not using.

  And the work is smaller than it sounds: InvJ already carries DeclsOkJ A F 
  m.heap existentially quantified over F, step_okJ already preserves it,
  resolvesAt_defineMethod is already the transport lemma. We're generalizing one
  hypothesis, not building a logic. Our "frame rule" is a single lemma about
  defineMethod, not the general theorem — a day, not a project.

  The one thing I'd insist on

  Define the slot resource as a partial commutative monoid: composition is
  disjoint union of slot maps with agreement on shared defined entries, ⊥ is the
  empty map, and conflict is failure of composition. If you do that, it is a
  resource algebra — essentially the gmap RA — and lifting it into Iris later is
  mechanical, with HJudge/StateInterp.lean as the seat to connect it to the
  real Heap.

  If instead conflict-freedom gets written as an ad-hoc Bool over lists, we'll
  have built something correct that has to be thrown away to grow. The PCM
  discipline costs nothing now and buys the option.

  They're not competitors

  HJudge already has four admission routes with wp among them. First-order slots
  would be the fast path — decidable, in the certificate, covering the static
  majority — with Iris as the slow path for what the enumeration can't see:
  Class.new in a loop, define_method over a computed list, runtime prepend.
  That's the same fast/slow structure Judge and SemJudge already have one level
  up. Building first-order forecloses nothing.

  One clarification on your framing, since it matters for what to write: HTy
  already is a semantic model of Ruby types — denotational, over values (den : 
  Heap → Value → Prop). What's missing isn't a value model; it's a resource 
  model of the method table. Different axis, and the slot algebra is the thing
  that doesn't exist yet in either layer.

  What would change my mind

  If the footprint turns out to need existential quantification over unboundedly
  many runtime-created classes, enumeration fails and you need real ghost
  state. That's measurable before we commit, and the early evidence points the
  other way: the slice's ancestry structure is static — three include Comparable
  at known classes and one include on Module that happens at boot, before any
  claim is taken.

  I'd measure that first, then write the PCM. Want me to run the
  ancestry-mutation survey over the slice, or start on the slot algebra?

✻ Churned for 53s · done 4:50 PM

❯ /model                                                                        
  ⎿  Set model to Fable 5 and saved as your default for new sessions

❯ Before doing this, let's think a bit more about how to operationalize this.   
  What is a reasonable semantic judgement inventory that we can now generate to 
  help us accomplish our goal of typing the entire homebrew slice?              

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

⏺ Good instinct to inventory before building — and the census gives us real
  numbers to plan against, so this can be a bill of materials rather than a wish
  list. The key organizing move: not everything blocked should become a 
  semantic judgment. There are four tiers, and putting a construct in the wrong
  tier is how the inventory blows up.

  Tier 0 — generated slot resources (data, zero proofs)

  The slot algebra's whole point is that these are emitter-generated and 
  kernel-checked, never hand-written:

  ┌────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────┐
  │      resource      │        count (slice)        │       source        │
  ├────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────┤
  │ defined(K, m,      │ ~114 (one per def)          │ walk of the linked  │
  │ body)              │                             │ program             │
  ├────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────┤
  │ spine(C..owner)    │ ~35 classes/modules; chain  │ class graph + the 3 │
  │                    │ graph static after boot     │  include Comparable │
  ├────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────┤
  │ empty(K, m) shadow │ derived per claimed Row,    │ footprint           │
  │  segments          │ not authored                │ computation         │
  ├────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────┤
  │ method_missing     │ 1 fact (nothing in the      │ one grep-shaped     │
  │ absence            │ slice defines it)           │ check, decide       │
  └────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────┘

  This tier is the frame machinery itself. It has one metatheory bill — the
  generalized resolvesAt_defineMethod and its induction through step_okJ — paid
  once, amortized over everything below.

  Tier 1 — builtin call-shape facts (hand-proved once, reusable forever)

  The semantic-admission inventory proper: facts keyed on (receiver type, name, 
  arg types), bypassing Decls' name-globality and one-signature limits. From the
  slice's actual call sites:

  - Arithmetic family (~12): Integer#/ at Integer and Float (the two-shape
    case), Integer#%, Float#{*,+,<=,>=,round}, Array#min at [Float]. Unblocks
    round_up and base_score.
  - String family (~15): scan, match, start_with?, split, gsub, sub, to_str, tr,
    delete_prefix, []. The slice is a parser; this family is its diet.
  - Hash/Array non-block ops (~8): fetch (62 sites!), dig, key?, [], join,
    first, last, compact.
  - Comparable-derived ops (~6): <, >, <=, >=, between?, clamp at the mixin —
    the three-include Comparable payoff, expressible only once Tier 0 exists.

  Order 40 facts. Each is a small lemma in the entryOk_even / inv_grow_valueJ
  style; many are near-copies of each other. This tier is embarrassingly 
  parallel and never has to be re-done for the next target program.

  Tier 2 — schema lemmas (one lemma, many sites)

  The J47-style constructs, now with bodies checked instead of forgotten:

  schema: yielding builtin + block (map/select/any?/find/sort_by…)
  sites: ~149 (send-block, the dominant head)
  note: one schema per builtin shape, ~10 shapes; block body judged under the
  schema, which is the J16/J19 arrow bill paid semantically
  ────────────────────────────────────────
  schema: defs with a checked body
  sites: 27
  note: replaces install-and-forget; eigenclass is just another slot owner in
  the
  model
  ────────────────────────────────────────
  schema: class C < D + zsuper
  sites: 13 + 9
  note: the Token hierarchy; zsuper is literally a read of the superclass's slot

  — the slot model's native idiom
  ────────────────────────────────────────
  schema: alias
  sites: 2
  note: a slot copy: reader on (K, old), writer on (K, new) — almost a demo of
  the algebra

  Tier 3 — syntactic rungs; keep them out of the inventory

  kwargs (~149 sites, second-dominant), next, begin/rescue, splat, send-call:
  these are parameter-binding and control-flow, with nothing heap-shaped about
  them. Making them semantic claims would be using the escape hatch as a front
  door — they're ordinary Judge rules plus emitter arms, and cheaper there.

  Sequencing by unlock

  1. Tier 0 + arithmetic/String slice of Tier 1 → cvss.rb and semver.rb with
     typed bodies (their remaining heads are defs/module/1–2 send-blocks).
  2. defs schema (Tier 2) → purl.rb, pkg_version.rb mostly fall (plus alias,
     plus kwargs from Tier 3).
  3. kwargs rung (Tier 3) → identify.rb (24 of its 40 blocked heads are kwargs).
  4. Yielding-builtin schemas + class-sup/zsuper → parser.rb, then the two big
     files, version.rb and vulnerability.rb, whose 297 combined blocked heads
     are ~75% send-block+kwargs.

  Notice the shape: the two biggest files are blocked mostly on Tier 2's one big
  schema family and Tier 3's one rung — not on hundreds of distinct facts. The
  long tail is short.

  If this looks right, the two artifacts to write first are the slot PCM (Tier
  0's foundation) and a slice-inventory.md recording exactly this table with its
  census provenance — the latter so the ratchet has something to consume as
  tiers land. Want me to draft both?

✻ Churned for 1m 20s · done 4:55 PM

❯ /model                                                                        
  ⎿  Set model to Fable 5 and saved as your default for new sessions

❯ Let's draft both. Also, when thinking about this for the writeup: don't stay  
  married to any of the machinery we've already built. We are free to rip out   
  old cruft as needed in order to make this cleaner.                            

  Ran 3 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

⏺ Write(~/code/semantics-quick/sam-xif/ruby/docs/semantics/slot-frame.md)
  ⎿  Wrote 269 lines to ../docs/semantics/slot-frame.md
       1 # The slot frame — local heap stability as a first-order resourc
       2 
          design conversation
         observation that the
         tic, unchecked bodies,
       6 `HTy`'s undecidability at the certificate boundary) are symptoms
       7 absence: **no way to say a heap fact is *locally* stable**, so s
       8 globally (`declaresName`, name-global) or not at all. Decisions 
       9 
         slice-inventory.md) —
     … +419 lines (ctrl+o to expand)

⏺ Write(~/code/semantics-quick/sam-xif/ruby/homebrew/slice-inventory.md)
  ⎿  Wrote 106 lines to ../homebrew/slice-inventory.md
       1 # The slice inventory — semantic judgments needed to type the wh
       2 
         ping all eight slice
         laces the current
         bout the *defining
       6 step* and never look inside a body (`jcert.rb`'s `defs` arm dest
       7 `_params, _body`; `validateJ_certifies_defs` counts those claims
       8 
         s/slot-frame.md)
         ass rows possible at
     … +165 lines (ctrl+o to expand)

  Ran 3 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)
⏺ Both drafted, plus an index entry in docs/semantics/README.md.

  docs/semantics/slot-frame.md — the foundation, as SF-numbers:

  - §1 names the three stand-ins the frame replaces, each quoted against its own
    docstring admitting it's a placeholder (declaresName/F1c, core-rows.txt's
    one-row-per-name, NoHook's T::Sig prose case).
  - §2–§3 the model: slot maps with a co-finite default, method_missing as a
    default write (and the honest note that this makes it load-bearing for the
    first time — hookFreeNames omits it soundly only because nothing owns
    emptiness today), spine as a resource because prepend splices the
    projection, and the PCM (SlotClaim.compose, gmap-RA shape so the Iris lift
    stays mechanical).
  - SF6/SF8 are the two decisions from our discussion, recorded with their
    corrections: reads duplicable / writes discharged by enumeration over the
    closed world (not lock transfer), and write-conflict checked at one slot
    against its readers rather than "own all front slots" — with the reason (the
    latter quantifies over classes that don't exist yet).
  - §4 the boot-prefix move, carrying the survey data: 8 ancestry mutations, all
    definition-position, 0 at runtime.
  - §6 the theorem ladder, SF-T1 (generalize resolvesAt_defineMethod)
    deliberately first and small — it's where the design meets the shadow
    clause, so failure is discovered in one lemma.
  - §7 exercises your demolition license explicitly: name-globality, the
    one-row-per-name rule, freshNames (subsumed by install-sets), the NoHook
    prose case — all listed for removal — plus a candidate flag on Assn's
    store-cancellation overlapping Row. Fixed points stated too: the
    data-certificate posture and SemJudge's formula.
  - §8/§9 record the no-Iris decision with its flip condition, and what this
    doesn't fix (overloading, prelude arity, block behavioral content).

  homebrew/slice-inventory.md — the four tiers with measured counts and
  provenance (§5a census + today's measurements), the Tier-1 honesty row
  (Comparable ops enter as assumed witnesses until ResolvesUser grows arity),
  the four-step unlock sequence ending at version.rb/vulnerability.rb, and a
  consumption rule so it behaves like the other ratchets — counts move only with
  a named discharging artifact, and the first conditional accept gets recorded
  in judge-slice.md so it isn't misread as a regression against today's
  unconditional-but-vacuous six.

  Natural next step when you're ready: SF-T1 — state the slot-disjoint
  generalization of resolvesAt_defineMethod and see how much of the existing
  proof survives contact with crubyShadow.

✻ Cogitated for 3m 58s · done 5:01 PM

❯ Do any of the open-world deficiencies of the first-order slot frame           
  construction apply to programs that take some serialized input as data? For   
  instance, a CLI that takes some list<string> of command line arguments. To    
  me, this still feels somewhat "closed-world" because the program definition   
  is (ideally) static. It is just the input, which we can make a claim is well  
  typed (string, bytes), that changes .                                         

⏺ Short answer: no — and the reason is worth pinning down precisely, because it
  tells you exactly where the boundary actually sits.

  The closed world is about write sites, not the value space

  SF6's enumeration never needed the program's inputs to be known. It needs the
  inventory of table-mutating actions to be statically over-approximable: every
  def, defs, alias, include/prepend/extend, method_missing install. In a static
  program text, those sites are enumerable regardless of what argv holds. Input
  affects two things, and neither breaks the check:

  1. Which sites execute. The conflict check already assumes every site may run
     — it's a may-analysis over the whole text. Input choosing a subset of them
     only makes the over-approximation more conservative, never wrong. (This is
     also why the boot-prefix split (SF9) is by position, not by execution
     path.)
  2. What values flow through typed slots. argv : Array[String] is exactly your
     "the input is well typed" claim, and it's the same shape as every parameter
     judgment: a Judge derivation is already universally quantified over
     conformant inputs — SemJudge says every conformant start state, and a
     string parameter's Γ entry says any String. Data varying over a typed
     domain is the normal case, not an open-world case.

  So a CLI over List<String> is squarely inside the frame. Your instinct is
  right.

  Where the boundary actually is: data laundered into names

  Ruby's specific danger is that the data/code boundary is porous. The failure
  mode isn't "input exists"; it's input flowing into the name coordinate of a 
  write site:

  define_method(argv[0]) { ... }     # the site is static; the (class, name) KEY
  is not
  Kernel.eval(File.read(argv[1]))    # the site set itself is not static

  The first is the interesting case, and it degrades gracefully: the site is
  still enumerated, but its key set must be over-approximated to ⊤ at the name
  coordinate — "installs some name on this class" — which conflicts with every
  empty reader on chains through that class. Result: the claims are rejected (or
  that site exits to wp with a hand proof that, say, the name is drawn from a
  validated whitelist). Soundness is never at stake; completeness is lost 
  exactly at the laundering sites. eval is the one true open-world hole — it
  makes the site inventory itself dynamic — and it's already gated out at the
  desugar.

  Two non-dangers worth separating from these, because they look similar:

  - obj.send(argv[0]) — a computed dispatch, not a write. The frame doesn't care
    (nothing is installed); it's untypable for the ordinary reason that you
    can't produce a Row for an unknown name. A typing gap, not a frame gap.
  - Input as hash keys / version strings — the slice's actual usage
    (fetch(data_key), Version.new(argv_string)). Pure data flow through typed
    slots; invisible to the frame.

  So the checkable criterion is: no input-tainted value reaches the name 
  position of a table-mutating head. That's a syntactic/dataflow condition an
  emitter can check per site, and on the slice it holds vacuously — every
  def/include in those eight files has a literal name.

  The pleasing convergence

  This lands the slot frame on the same posture the rest of the project already
  committed to: bounded-effect-checking.md's concolic design is concrete boot 
  heap, symbolic inputs, and type-safety-by-reachability.md's verification
  direction quantifies over input-parameterized runs. "Program static, input
  symbolic over a typed domain" is this system's definition of closed-world —
  the slot frame didn't add a new assumption, it inherited the existing one.
  Might be worth a sentence in slot-frame.md §6/SF6 recording that the closed
  world means closed write-site inventory with literal name keys, not closed 
  input space — want me to add it?

✻ Brewed for 40s · done 5:10 PM

❯ loss of completeness at such laundering sites is honestly okay with me. In a  
  real-world setting, this may be considered a flag to programmers that their   
  code is not defensive enough.                                                 

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

⏺ Recorded as SF6a in slot-frame.md, with your stance made explicit as a design
  decision rather than a caveat:

  ▎ Soundness is never at stake; completeness is lost exactly at laundering 
  ▎ sites, and that loss is accepted as a feature: a rejection there flags code 
  ▎ whose metaprogramming is driven by unvalidated input — a defensiveness 
  ▎ signal to the programmer, not a checker deficiency to engineer away.

  It also pins the definition we converged on (closed write-site inventory with 
  literal name keys, not closed input space), ties it to the existing concolic
  posture in bounded-effect-checking.md (concrete boot heap, symbolic inputs),
  separates the two non-dangers (computed dispatch, data through typed slots),
  and leaves the wp door for a site a hand proof can bound — the
  validated-whitelist case.

  One thought your framing suggests for later, not acted on: since the emitter
  must detect laundering sites anyway to over-approximate their keys, the list 
  of those sites is nearly free to surface as a report — "your metaprogramming
  is input-driven here and here" — which is a diagnostic artifact people might
  value independently of certification, much like --fragment's list is context
  beside the verdict. Could be a cheap deliverable to hang off the conflict
  check when it lands.

✻ Cogitated for 25s · done 5:12 PM

※ recap: Goal: type the whole Homebrew slice with bodies checked, via a first-order slot-frame for local heap stability. Both design docs (slot-frame.md, slice-inventory.md) are drafted. Next: attempt SF-T1, the slot-disjoint generalization of resolvesAt_defineMethod.

❯ Does this mean we'll struggle with typing realistic Rails programs?           

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

⏺ Less than the laundering discussion would suggest — because Rails'
  metaprogramming is mostly not input laundering. It's worth separating the
  taxonomy, since each kind lands in a different bucket, and only one bucket is
  genuinely hard.

  1. DSL macros: computed installs, literal names — the good bucket

  has_many :users, delegate :name, to: :profile, attr_accessor :count, validates
  … — the names being installed derive from literal symbols in the program 
  text, not from input. Statically, has_many :users is a macro that installs
  users, users=, user_ids… — a computable function of a literal argument. That's
  schema-lemma territory (the Tier-2 pattern: one lemma per macro shape, many
  sites), and the footprint stays fully enumerable: the emitter expands the
  macro's install-set the way it already expands def's.

  This isn't speculative — it's the pilot that's already built.
  Proof/Judgment/Rails.lean (J35) does exactly this shape end to end:
  define_method(:shout) { 1 } inside class String, admitted as a semantic claim
  carrying the row String#shout : () → Integer, discharged by executing the 
  semantics, with subsequent dispatch on the generated row syntactically typed.
  has_many is that pilot with a bigger install-set and a body you don't execute
  but assume (next bucket).

  2. Schema-derived methods: external data, but static external data

  ActiveRecord attribute methods come from the DB schema — which in a real app
  is db/schema.rb, a checked-in artifact. So the rows are assumptions
  conditioned on a static file, ingestable exactly the way certify/rbi.py
  ingests sigs. And there's strong precedent that this is the right posture:
  tapioca does precisely this for Sorbet — untrusted DSL compilers emitting row
  declarations from the schema and the association graph. Our version is the
  same architecture with a better story: the assumptions are per-slot, printed
  in carries:, and the frame says they stay true, rather than being ambient
  trust.

  3. The genuinely hard bucket — and it's specific, not diffuse

  Three real problems, none of them the argv kind:

  - Lazy definition post-boot. Modern AR defines attribute methods on first call
    via method_missing, then installs them. That's a post-boot write with a
    semi-computed name, and method_missing live on every model chain kills noMM
    — so empty ownership on model chains is mostly unavailable. Mitigations
    exist (define_attribute_methods can be forced eagerly at boot, pulling the
    writes into the SF9 prefix; or one wp-door lemma per Rails-internal pattern,
    proved once per Rails version and reused), but this is real work.
  - Zeitwerk autoloading. const_missing → require at first reference makes the
    file set lazy. For us that's the linker's dynamic-require gate, hit earlier
    in the pipeline than the frame — you'd eager-load
    (Zeitwerk::Loader#eager_load exists precisely to make this static) and link
    the closure.
  - Long framework-owned spines. An AR model's ancestor chain is ~60 modules
    with prepends (dirty tracking, callbacks). spine claims become large and
    brittle against framework upgrades — manageable (spines are data,
    regenerated per Rails version), but it means claims are versioned against
    the framework.

  The honest strategic answer

  Nobody types Rails by analyzing Rails' internals — Sorbet doesn't, Steep
  doesn't. The viable posture, which the frame supports rather than obstructs,
  is: treat boot as producing a conformant heap, take claims after it (SF9 
  already says this), source the framework's rows from schema+DSL expansion as 
  assumptions (tapioca posture), and type the application code against them. Our
  marginal advantages over Sorbet in that world are the ones this whole design
  bought: assumptions that are local, printed, and auditable; some dischargeable
  by actually executing boot in the model (the J35 trick, which no RBI-based
  system can do); and a frame theorem saying app code can't silently invalidate
  them.

  So: the slice → a Sinatra-scale CLI app is mostly Tier-1/Tier-2 growth. Rails
  is a genuine campaign — but the blockers are the three named ones above, not
  an open-world wall, and SF6a's laundering rejection would fire on
  approximately none of idiomatic Rails app code (its metaprogramming is
  literal-symbol-driven). Where it fires — define_method(params[:name]) in a
  controller — you'd want it to.

✻ Brewed for 1m 5s · done 5:20 PM

❯ /export                                                                       
  ⎿  Conversation exported to:
     /Users/samxifaras/code/semantics-quick/sam-xif/ruby/lean/journal/2026-08-28
     -174237-local-command-caveatcaveat-the-messages-below.txt

❯ Can you explain more on how this will be operationalized? Will we take        
  predicates over SlotClaims as hypotheses for all of our judgements?           

⏺ Good question to press on, because the naive answer — thread a SlotClaim
  hypothesis through every rule — is exactly the mistake to avoid, and the
  codebase has already learned it (Decls.lean:1995 calls it "the same
  put-the-condition-in-the-judgement trade, measured for the fifth time").
  Here's the operationalization I'd defend, layer by layer.

  1. The judgment gets one ambient parameter, not per-rule hypotheses

  There's a precise precedent: J31 added A : SemAxioms as an index on Judge —
  ambient, threaded structurally, read by exactly one arm (semantic). The claim
  set S : SlotClaim enters the same way:

  lean
  inductive Judge (A : SemAxioms) (S : SlotClaim) : Decls → Env → Expr → …

  Most rules never look at S. The only rules that read it are the write rules,
  and there it's a point-for-point premise replacement, same shape, different
  content:

  ┌─────────────────────┬──────────────────────┬────────────────────────────┐
  │        rule         │ today (name-global)  │  after (local, decidable)  │
  ├─────────────────────┼──────────────────────┼────────────────────────────┤
  │ defPromote /        │ declaresName D name  │ writeOk S ctx.cls name =   │
  │ defDecl             │ = false              │ true                       │
  ├─────────────────────┼──────────────────────┼────────────────────────────┤
  │ defs schema claim   │ freshNames           │ writeOk S eigen name =     │
  │                     │ checker-enforced     │ true                       │
  ├─────────────────────┼──────────────────────┼────────────────────────────┤
  │                     │                      │ reader (K, old) ∈          │
  │ alias (new)         │ —                    │ S-compatible, writeOk S K  │
  │                     │                      │ new                        │
  ├─────────────────────┼──────────────────────┼────────────────────────────┤
  │ future              │                      │                            │
  │ include/prepend     │ —                    │ spineOk S K = true         │
  │ rung                │                      │                            │
  └─────────────────────┴──────────────────────┴────────────────────────────┘

  writeOk is "no claim in S holds defined or empty on (K, name)" — a list
  lookup, decide-able, checked by validateJ at that derivation node exactly the
  way it checks declaresName today. So the checker's work per node barely
  changes; what changes is that the premise stopped quantifying over the whole
  namespace.

  Crucially, the read side is untouched. The send rule keeps reading D; the
  connection is that D is now derived from S (D := rowsOf S — each Row C m σ
  yields its table entry). Sends don't know slots exist.

  2. SlotsOk is one invariant conjunct, not a judgment premise

  The Prop-level predicate over SlotClaim appears in exactly one hypothesis
  position: inside InvJ, refounding DeclsOkJ:

  lean
  SlotsOk (S : SlotClaim) (h : Heap) : Prop
  -- every `defined (K,m,md)` ∈ S: the table at K has md at m
  -- every `empty (K,m)` ∈ S: lookup misses, and K's method_missing is absent
  per noMM
  -- every `spine (C,seg)` ∈ S: ancestors h C's segment = seg

  InvJ today is … ∧ DeclsOkJ A F m.heap ∧ … with F existential (Konts.lean:530).
  It becomes … ∧ SlotsOk S m.heap ∧ DeclsOkJ A (rowsOf S) m.heap ∧ … — where
  the second conjunct is now a lemma from the first (slotsOk_declsOk), not an
  independent obligation. So preservation (step_okJ) re-establishes SlotsOk per
  step, and the frame lemma (SF-T1's generalization) is the tool its
  defineMethod case uses: the step's install passed writeOk, writeOk implies
  slot-disjointness from every claim, transport.

  Note what this buys structurally: the disjointness fact preservation needs at
  each write step arrives through the derivation itself — the writeOk premise at
  that node — rather than through a whole-program side condition that would
  have to be threaded to an arbitrary step. That's why Option "keep it entirely
  out of the judgment" loses: per-step re-establishment needs a per-step fact,
  and the derivation node is the natural carrier. This is the same reason
  declaresName sits in the rules today; we're keeping the topology and fixing
  the granularity.

  3. What the certificate and validateJ carry

  Wire-format side, all data:

  1. JCert gains slot_claims — the composed footprint (the emitter computes it
     per claimed Row; SF7).
  2. validateJ gains three checks: compose ≠ none over the claims;
     writeOk/spineOk at each write node (it's already walking every node); and
     the untyped-remainder sweep — installs in program text outside any
     derivation (the boot prefix is exempted per SF9, everything else must be
     covered by a derivation or be disjoint).
  3. Witness check: each defined either discharges at the conformant heap (the
     constOkB pattern, per slot) or is printed as a carried assumption — the
     core-rows.txt successor, now per-(class, name).

  The composed theorem's statement changes shape only in its residue:

  validateJ cert prog = true
  → SemAxiomsOk … → (per-slot defined-witness residue)
  → safety, AND every claimed Row stable through the run

  — same formula as validateJ_certifies, with the frame hypothesis absorbed into
  the Bool and the name-global guard gone from the rules.

  4. Who computes what (the division of labor)

  ┌─────────────┬─────────────────────────────────────────┬────────────────┐
  │  component  │                  role                   │    trusted?    │
  ├─────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────┼────────────────┤
  │             │ picks the claim set, computes           │ no — wrong     │
  │ jcert.rb    │ footprints and install-sets             │ footprint =    │
  │             │                                         │ reject         │
  ├─────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────┼────────────────┤
  │ validateJ   │ recomputes composition, decides writeOk │ yes, one Bool  │
  │             │  per node, sweeps the remainder         │                │
  ├─────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────┼────────────────┤
  │ SF-T1/T2    │ writeOk = true → SlotsOk survives the   │ proved once    │
  │ lemmas      │ step                                    │                │
  ├─────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────┼────────────────┤
  │ SF-T3       │ typed subterms' installs are exactly    │                │
  │ (adequacy)  │ their declared install-sets, so the     │ proved once    │
  │             │ remainder sweep may skip them           │                │
  └─────────────┴─────────────────────────────────────────┴────────────────┘

  So to answer the question directly: predicates over SlotClaims appear as 
  hypotheses in exactly two places — writeOk-style decidable premises on the
  handful of write rules (replacing declaresName premises one-for-one), and the
  single SlotsOk conjunct in InvJ. Every other rule sees S only as an inert
  index, the way it already sees A. The alternative — a frame hypothesis on
  every rule, separation-logic style — would buy generality no rule consumes and
  re-state the whole preservation mountain; the ambient-index pattern is the
  one the layer has already paid for twice (A, and D itself).

  If you want, I can append this as an "operationalization" section (§5a) to
  slot-frame.md — it's the part of the design a fresh implementer would
  otherwise have to re-derive.

✻ Worked for 1m 11s · done 5:44 PM

❯ So then do the write rules leave an S' behind?                                

⏺ Yes — and the pleasing thing is that the judgment already has this channel:
  it's the out-table. defPromote's conclusion is

  lean
  Judge A D Γ (.def' name [] body) top ctx .sym Γ (addRow D ctx.cls name {…})

  — D in, D' = addRow D … out, threaded left-to-right through JudgeSeq in
  program order. The S-threading is that channel, generalized: Judge A S Γ e top
  ctx τ Γ' S', where a write rule's conclusion is S' = S ⊕ rowClaim(K, name, σ)
  and everything else passes S through unchanged. Program order on the spine =
  the machine's actual install order, which is exactly what preservation needs.

  Four things fall out, one of which is a demolition candidate:

  1. What grows is the footprint, not just the row. S' gains the new Row's whole
  claim — defined (K, name) plus its empty shadow segment plus its spine
  dependency. So the premise at a write node is really two checks folded
  together: writeOk S K name (no existing reader on the slot being written) and
  (S ⊕ rowClaim …) ≠ none (the new claim's own empty/spine reads compose with
  everything already claimed). The second is what catches the subtle case: a new
  Row whose shadow segment passes through a slot some earlier write filled.
  Both are the same compose call.

  2. Growth is monotone — nothing ever leaves S. This is forced by SF6, not
  chosen separately: reads are freely duplicable, so a claim can't be revoked —
  you can never prove nobody else copied it. Consequence: a genuine overwrite of
  a claimed slot is refused, period. The alternative (writer retires the claim,
  writes, re-claims — a strong update) requires linear/fractional permissions,
  which is precisely the machinery we declined to buy. If a real program in
  scope ever needs a checked redefinition, that's a wp-door case or the flip
  condition firing, and we'd want to know.

  3. Joins take the meet, and today that's nearly vacuous. An if whose branches
  produce S₁', S₂' continues with the claims both agree on — the same shape as
  the env join (env_meet / the chosen continuation environment below both
  exits). In practice the position guards (top = false, class-body-only, inBlock
  = false…) bar writes inside branches almost everywhere, so the join rarely
  has anything to decide — but the rule should be stated meet-wise so it's sound
  when a rung loosens a guard later.

  4. The demolition candidate: D' becomes derived and the second channel goes 
  away. Once D := rowsOf S, threading both is redundant — Judge A S Γ e … Γ' S'
  with rowsOf applied wherever a read rule wants a table. That's one thread
  instead of two, addRow becomes ⊕ composed with rowsOf, and the "one table
  carries another" slack (tableCarries) becomes a corollary of claim-set
  inclusion. It's exactly the kind of cruft-removal you licensed — though I'd
  sequence it after SF-T2, not with it: first prove preservation with S
  alongside the existing D threading (so the diff against step_okJ is one
  premise per write case), then collapse the channels as a separate refactor
  with the metatheory already green. Doing both at once turns a one-lemma
  experiment into a layer rewrite.

  One honest asterisk on the semantic side: S' in the judgment is
  syntax-directed bookkeeping, but its meaning — SlotsOk S' h' after the step —
  is the preservation obligation, and the new Row's empty segment must actually
  hold at h'. That's where SF-T1 earns its position at the top of the ladder:
  the transport has to deliver not just "old claims survive the write" but "the
  write's own claim is established," which is the lookup_go_defineMethod_self +
  shadow-clause pairing the existing defPromote preservation case already makes
  for D. Same argument, slot-shaped.

✻ Brewed for 55s · done 5:48 PM

❯ /model                                                                        
  ⎿  Set model to Opus 5 (1M context) and saved as your default for new sessions